Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is
a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please
subscribe to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and share
the video to help spread this free series of
videos. Thanks for your help. Also, remember
to sign up via the link in the description to
get all of the lab files for this course, so
you can try it out yourself in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these,
I highly recommend picking up
Boson’s NetSim for the CCNA, click the link
in the video description to check it out.
It’s a network simulator like packet tracer, but
it’s even better, and it includes all of these
guided labs to not only help you get hands-on
practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the exam
topics. I used it myself when studying for my
certifications, so I feel confident
about recommending it to all of you.
If you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
In today’s video we’ll practice configuring
standard ACLs, access control lists, with a
little OSPF also. Standard ACLs can be used to
identify traffic based on the source IP address
of the packet, and then either permit or deny
it. There are two main ways to configure them,
standard numbered ACLs and standard named
ACLs. In this lab, we’ll practice both.
So let’s get right into it. Step 1 says to
configure OSPF on R1 and R2 to allow full
connectivity between the devices. We don’t
have to do any special OSPF configurations,
let’s just simply enable it on
each interface. I’ll start on R1.
ENABLE. CONF T. ROUTER OSPF 1. I’ll enable
it on the two gig ethernet interfaces first.
NETWORK 172.16.0.0 0.0.255.255 AREA 0. And now
the serial interface. NETWORK 203.0.113.0 0.0.0.3
AREA 0. Let’s see if it was enabled on
each interface. DO SHOW IP OSPF INTERFACE.
Okay, we can see gigabitethernet 0/0, 0/1, and
serial 0/0/0, so it’s activated on all interfaces.
Let’s do the same on R2.
ENABLE. CONF T. ROUTER OSPF 1. Again, I’ll enable
it on the two gig ethernet interfaces first.
NETWORK 192.168.0.0 0.0.255.255 AREA 0. And then
the serial interface. NETWORK 203.0.113.0 0.0.0.3
AREA 0. And let’s check. DO SHOW IP OSPF
INTERFACE. So, we can see gigabitethernet0/0, 0/1,
and serial 0/0/0. Let’s make sure they are
OSPF neighbors. DO SHOW IP OSPF NEIGHBOR.
There’s R1, in the full state. Notice the dash
here. Because this is a serial connection,
the OSPF network type is point-to-point, so no DR
or BDR is needed. Finally let’s check the routing
table. DO SHOW IP ROUTE. R2 learned routes
to 172.16.1.0/24 and 2.0/24 from R1, perfect.
How about on R1? DO SHOW IP ROUTE. R1 learned
routes to 192.168.1.0/24 and 2.0/24 from R2.
So, our OSPF configuration is working and we
now have full connectivity in this network.
Now let’s restrict some of that traffic
according to the network policies in step 2.
Four requirements are listed, and in this case
we should configure one ACL for each requirement.
To get practice with both numbered and named
ACLs, we will configure numbered ACLs on R1 and
named ACLs on R2. As I said in the lecture video,
ACL configuration can be quite flexible. So,
your configurations don’t have to be exactly
the same as mine. But here’s my solution.
The first two requirements are about restricting
access to 192.168.1.0/24 and 2.0/24. Standard ACLs
should be configured as close to the destination
as possible, so we should configure these ACLs on
R2. So let’s return to R2 and configure that first
one. Only PC1 and PC3 can access 192.168.1.0/24.
So, I can make two permit entries, one each
for PC1 and PC3, and then a deny any entry.
The command to enter standard named ACL config
mode is IP ACCESS-LIST STANDARD, and I’ll name it
TO_192.168.1.0/24. Now I’ll permit PC1 . PERMIT
172.16.1.1. And same for PC3. PERMIT 172.16.2.1.
So, PC1 and PC3 are both permitted, and all
other traffic will be denied because of the
‘implicit deny’ at the end of all ACLs. However,
a good practice is to put a DENY ANY statement
at the end anyway, just to make it clear. It’s
not necessary, but it’s something I like to do.
Okay, so the ACL has been created, but it’s not
doing anything yet. We still need to apply it to
an interface. We want to restrict traffic entering
192.168.1.0/24, so I’ll apply it outbound on G0/0.
INTERFACE G0/0. IP ACCESS-GROUP TO_192.168.1.0/24
OUT. Remember that the command to apply an ACL
to an interface uses ACCESS-GROUP, not
ACCESS-LIST. Okay, let’s test if it’s
working. For the sake of time in this video I
won’t test every single requirement totally,
but I still want to demonstrate a little.
So, I’ll try a ping from PC1 to SRV1.
PING 192.168.1.100. Because the ARP process
needs to finish the first ping or two might fail,
but after that we can see that
PC1 is able to reach SRV1.
How about PC2? It shouldn’t be able to
reach SRV1. Let’s try a ping to SRV1.
PING 192.168.1.100. So, 203.0.113.2, which
is R2, tells us that SRV1 is unreachable.
PC2 has been blocked from accessing SRV1.
If we test the same from PC3 and PC4,
we’d find that PC3 can reach SRV1 but PC4 can’t.
Now let’s move on to the next requirement.
Hosts in 172.16.2.0/24
can’t access 192.168.2.0/24.
Again let’s configure an ACL
on R2. IP ACCESS-LIST STANDARD,
and I’ll name it TO_192.168.2.0/24. So, let’s
deny that subnet. DENY 172.16.2.0 0.0.0.255.
However we don’t want to restrict any other
traffic, so next let’s use a PERMIT ANY entry
to allow all other traffic. And finally, let’s
apply it to the interface. INTERFACE G0/1.
IP ACCESS-GROUP TO_192.168.2.0/24 OUT. Why this
interface? Again, because standard ACLs should be
applied as close to the destination as possible,
and we are trying to control traffic destined
for the 192.168.2.0/24 network. Now I’ll quickly
test this ACL, first with a ping from PC1 to SRV2.
PC1 should be able to reach SRV2,
let’s see. PING 192.168.2.100. Again,
a ping or two might be lost until the ARP process
finishes, but then PC1 will be able to ping SRV2.
But if we try from PC3, the ping should
fail. Let’s see. PING 192.168.2.100.
We get that same message,
destination host unreachable.
Now, I’ll return to R2 and let’s take a look at
something I didn’t show in the lecture video.
DO SHOW ACCESS-LISTS. Here you can see
each ACL, but you can also see how many
packets matched each entry of each ACL,
which can be very useful information.
Okay, finally we have to use ACLs
on R1 to stop the 172.16.1.0/24
and 2.0/24 subnets from
communicating. So, let’s go to R1.
I’ll configure the two ACLs first and then
apply them to the appropriate interfaces.
First up, I’ll configure
ACL 1 to deny 172.16.1.0/24
but permit all other traffic. Remember, although
named ACLs use the command IP ACCESS-LIST,
numbered ACLs just use ACCESS-LIST. So,
ACCESS-LIST 1 DENY 172.16.1.0 0.0.0.255.
Then I’ll permit all other traffic.
ACCESS-LIST 1 PERMIT ANY. That’s it for ACL1.
Now I’ll just use the up arrow and edit this
to ACL 2 and make it deny 172.16.2.0/24.
Then do the same for the PERMIT ANY. And
now I’ll check. DO SHOW ACCESS-LISTS.
Okay, ACL1 denies 172.16.1.0/24 but permits all
other traffic, and ACL2 denies 172.16.2.0/24
but permits all other traffic. Now let’s
apply them, ACL1 to G0/1 and ACL2 to G0/0.
INTERFACE G0/1. IP ACCESS-GROUP 1 OUT.
That restricts traffic from 172.16.1.0/24
from accessing 2.0/24. And next, INTERFACE
G0/0. IP ACCESS-GROUP 2 OUT. That restricts
traffic from 172.16.2.0/24 from accessing 1.0/24.
Finally, let’s test. I’ll ping from PC1 to PC3.
Let me show you something new. Here
on PC1 I’ll use the command PING -T,
followed by PC3’s IP address, 172.16.2.1. This
tells PC1 to ping forever, until we stop it.
You can stop it with CTRL + C, but I’ll leave
it for now. Notice that PC1 can’t reach PC3.
Now I’ll do the same from PC3 to PC1. PING
-T 172.16.1.1. Again, PC3 can’t reach PC1.
Now I’ll go back on R1,
and let’s check those ACLs.
DO SHOW ACCESS-LISTS. Notice how many matches
there are for the deny entries, because all of
those pings between PC1 and PC3 are being blocked.
If I use the up arrow to repeat the command,
you can see the count keeps going up. Okay, in
this video we did some basic OSPF configurations
to allow full connectivity in the network, and
then used standard ACLs to restrict specific
traffic. That’s all for this lab. Now let’s
take a look at a lab in Boson NetSim for CCNA.
Okay, here's today's Boson NetSim lab preview.
Now, NetSim for CCNA actually has quite a few
labs for ACLs. Here in the security fundamentals
section of NetSim for CCNA I counted 20 labs for
ACls. That's right, 20, 2 0. So, if you're
getting ready for the CCNA exam and want to
practice labbing ACLs, you gotta get NetSim.
If you complete all of these practice labs
in NetSim for ACLs, you're set for the CCNA exam,
you don't need to know anything more about ACLs.
Okay, so the one I've chosen to show you
today is ACL practice lab 2: standard ACLs.
So, the objective is 'practice configuring
standard ACLs on Cisco routers'.
Pretty simple. Here's the topology,
Router1 with Switch1 and PC1 in VLAN1.
And then Router2 with Switch2 and 3, PC2 and PC3,
in VLAN2 and VLAN3. And here are the commands you
need to know. So in this lab we are configuring
standard numbered ACLs, with this command.
Okay, here are the IP addresses on each device.
Each of the routers has a loopback interface,
and Router2 is using router
on a stick. You can see the
subinterfaces here for interVLAN
routing between VLAN2 and VLAN3.
Okay, here are the lab tasks. Task 1, I think
task 1 is the only task, yes it is. Practice
configuring standard ACLs. Okay, so you
can read this little introduction here.
Just notice the passwords are configured as
Boson. Okay, so from each PC verify that you
can ping the loopback0 interface
addresses of Router1 and Router2.
So, if you look at these log messages here you
can see that OSPF is configured on the routers,
so hopefully these PCs can ping
those interfaces. First, on PC1.
Here's Router1's loopback, okay it works. I
hit, this is control-c to cancel that ping.
And Router2's loopback, that works. Next, PC2.
Okay, looks good.
And that works as well. And finally on PC3.
Okay, and last, Router2's loopback.
That works as well. Okay, from each PC verify
that you can ping every other PC in the topology.
Okay, I'm just for the sake of time I'm
not going to do that. Let me just check
the routes here on the routers. So, Router1 has
routes to 10.0.2.0, which is VLAN2 and 10.0.3.0,
which is VLAN3. And also, VLAN1 is directly
connected. Let's check the routes on Router2.
SHOW IP ROUTE. And it learned, from OSPF, a route
to VLAN1, and it has a route to VLAN2 and VLAN3.
Okay, next step 3. From each PC, verify that you
can Telnet to Router1's loopback0 interface. Okay,
Telnet is something we haven't
looked at yet, but it's a way of
connecting to a device, like a router
or switch, to configure it in the CLI.
So, Telnet to Router1, and it works.
So now you can see I'm in PC1,
but I've connected to Router1 and I can configure
it just like I was connected to the console of
Router1. But I'm going to exit out of there. Okay,
on PC2 I'll try the same thing. TELNET 1.1.1.1.
Enter the password and I'm connected to Router1.
So, I will make a video about Telnet later in the
course, so don't worry about it for now. Okay,
and PC3 let's see if we can connect to Router1.
Okay, looks good. Alright,
and I'll exit out of there.
Okay, so step 4. Create standard ACL1 and
configure it to deny traffic from VLAN2
and VLAN3. All other traffic sources
from Router2 should be permitted.
Use no more than 2 rules when configuring ACL1.
Okay, ACL1, let me see where I have to apply
it. Apply standard ACL1 to the correct interface
and in a direction that will prevent traffic from
VLAN2 and VLAN3 from accessing any of the networks
on Router1. Okay, so let's think about that.
So, on Router1 we want to prevent PC2 and PC3
from connecting to any of these networks.
Either VLAN1 here or the loopback interface
on Router1. So I think we should configure the ACL
on Router1 and apply it inbound on this interface,
so when traffic tries to come to Router1 from
Router2, from these PCs, it will be blocked.
Okay, so, deny traffic from VLAN2 and VLAN3. So
let's configure that. CONF T. ACCESS-LIST 1 DENY
10.10.2.0. And for the wildcard mask I'm going to
use a wildcard mask that includes VLAN2 and VLAN3,
0.0.1.255. And I hope I'm correct about that.
So, this should cover 10.10.2.0 and 10.10.3.0/24.
And then I will create a
permit statement. ACCESS-LIST 1
PERMIT ANY. Because it only says to block traffic
from VLAN2 and VLAN3, it doesn't say anything
about other traffic, so we should permit it. Okay,
apply standard ACL1 to the correct interface and
in a direction that will prevent traffic...okay,
so I will apply that to...what was that interface?
It is this one here, fastethernet0/0, is the
one connected to Router2. IP ACCESS-GROUP 1 IN.
Okay, and then we will try to telnet
and ping Router1's loopback0 interface.
So from PC1 both should work. Okay, so that
works. I connected to Router1. And I'll ping it,
and that works as well. Now from PC2 and PC3,
if our ACL is configured
correctly, this should not work.
Yes, so that didn't work. It says trying 1.1.1.1,
but then it just returned us to the command
prompt, so that didn't work. How about a ping?
Destination host unreachable, okay. Next
I'll try from PC3. TELNET 1.1.1.1. Okay,
same thing, doesn't work. PING 1.1.1.1.
Destination host unreachable, perfect.
Okay next, step 8, create standard ACL 2 and
configure it to deny traffic from VLAN 1.
All other traffic sources should be
permitted. Use no more than 2 rules,
okay. And apply standard ACL 2 to an interface and
in a direction that will prevent remote networks
from pretending to reside on VLAN 1.
Okay, prevent remote networks from pretending to
reside on VLAN 1, let me briefly explain that.
So let's say there is a PC here in VLAN 2
that modifies its source IP address, or it
doesn't have to be here, it could be connected
somewhere else, maybe out here on the Internet,
connected to Router2. And it wants to
access something in VLAN1, let's say PC1.
So it sends a ping to Router1, and the source
is in VLAN 1, and the destination is in VLAN
1, it forwards it to PC1 like normal. However,
if we place an ACL outbound on this interface,
I believe its FastEthernet0/1, ah sorry 1/0,
blocking all traffic with a source in VLAN 1
from exiting that interface it will prevent that.
So, traffic from VLAN 1
will still be able to exit.
But because we applied it outbound on this
interface, that traffic pretending to be in VLAN
1 won't be able to enter. So, this is a security
measure, I will talk more about security later in
the course, so don't worry about it if you don't
understand it perfectly right at the moment.
So, let's configure that here on Router1.
ACCESS-LIST 2 DENY 10.10.1.0 /24. And permit other
traffic. Oops, I forgot this is not a named ACL.
ACCESS-LIST 2 PERMIT ANY. And then I will apply it
to that interface outbound here, FastEthernet1/0.
IP ACCESS-GROUP 2 OUT.
Okay, display and examine the rules
you created for both ACL 1 and ACL 2.
So I'll do that with DO SHOW
ACCESS-LISTS. And there they are.
As you can see, we've already got some
matches for ACL 1 when we tested that
telnet and ping. Okay, based on what you
have configured so far, apply either ACL
1 or ACL 2 to an interface and in a direction
that will prevent hosts connected to Router 1
from pretending to be hosts on VLAN2 or VLAN3.
Okay, so that is the same principle as before.
So, ACL 1 matches these source
addresses. So because they are the
source, all the traffic should be entering this
interface. No traffic with that source should be
exiting this interface. So, I'll apply the ACL
outbound on this interface, FastEthernet0/0.
Yes, that is correct. Okay, INTERFACE
F0/0. IP ACCESS-GROUP 1 OUT.
Okay, and that is all for the lab. So,
I will use the grade lab function, click on
this icon, and let's see if we got it correct.
Okay, that is correct. You completed
the lab successfully. So you can check
the configuration of each device, nothing is
highlighted so that means I did it correctly.
Okay, so there is a lab from Boson NetSim.
Fairly simple, but also some challenging
parts in it. So that's the thing I like about
NetSim, some of the labs are pretty simple,
some of them are more complex, and some
of them are a mix of both. There are,
as I said before, 20 labs for ACLs here, so
you get quite a variety of practice for access
control lists. If you want to get Boson NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
Before finishing today’s video I want
to thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button under
the video. Thank you to Junhong, OJ, Magrathea,
TheGunguy, l33america, Njabulo, Benjamin,
Tshepiso, Justin, Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison,
Apogee, Marko, Flodo, Daming, Joshua, Jhilmar,
Ed, Value, John, Funnydart, Scott, Hassan, Marek,
Velvijaykum, C Mohd, Mark, Yousif, Sidi, Boson
Software, Devin, Lito, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at the
time of recording by the way, November 23rd 2020,
if you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please
subscribe to the channel,
like the video, leave a comment, and share the
video with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links in the
description. I'm also a Brave verified publisher
and accept BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips
via the Brave browser. That's all for now.